Doctoral thesis in physics

carried out at the Institute for Micro- and Information Technology of the Hahn-Schickard-Gesellschaft e.V. on the topic:

Dynamic behaviour of micromechanical structures – Finite Element Simulation for design support and its verification by measurements


Summary

Within the scope of this work, the static and dynamic behaviour of micromechanical structures was investigated using 
numerical and experimental methods. Since analytical methods usually assume simplifications and only consider idealized
boundary conditions, the Finite Element Method (FEM) was used as a general numerical calculation method and various 
calculation models were developed.

The main focus was the simulation of frequency-analogue pressure and force sensors on the basis of resonant, 
micromechanical bimorph structures, as well as the characterisation of the measured variable-dependent frequency change. 
#In particular, the influences of anisotropic and temperature-dependent material properties as well as process-related 
technological influences when using piezoelectric thin-film structures were investigated.

FE models were developed to describe the load-dependent dynamic behaviour of frequency-analogue sensors and dimensioning 
proposals were elaborated taking into account geometric non-linearities, in particular stress-stiffening effects. In this 
way resonant silicon membrane pressure sensors with piezoelectric ZnO thin films could be designed and realized, which 
are characterized by a measured pressure sensitivity of 12.4 Hz/mbar in a pressure range up to 500 mbar.

On the basis of thin silicon bending bars electro-thermally driven force sensors were developed using NiCr thin film 
resistors, which are characterized by a measured force sensitivity of about 170 Hz/N. In particular, the temperature-dependent 
resonance behavior of the beam resonators was characterized by calculation and measurement techniques, and the temperature 
sensitivity of the sensor was reduced fourfold by FEM-supported redesign of the resistor layout.

With the help of coupled electro-mechanical field calculations, piezoelectric thin-film structures were modelled, 
which made a contribution to the optimisation of the technological deposition processes. For this purpose, FE-models 
for piezoelectric bimorph transducers were developed, which describe the dynamic behavior under consideration of the 
electro-mechanical excitation, and design rules for application-specific optimization were derived. For sputtered ZnO 
thin film structures, effective electro-mechanical coupling factors were determined by comparison with experimental 
measurements. Furthermore, the influence of geometry on the effective electro-mechanical coupling factor was 
simulated for different piezoelectrics (AlN, ZnO, PZT) and optimal layer thickness ratios were calculated. 
In particular, a mode-selective electrode layout was developed for resonant membrane pressure sensors in 
bimorph structure and the mode selectivity was verified by measurement. Simultaneous temperature compensation 
of the frequency-pressure characteristic curve could be mathematically proven by lateral layer structuring.

In support of the design, a layout for a resonant force sensor was developed using the FE method on the basis 
of a triple beam structure. A high unimodality of the resonator was achieved by structuring the clamping areas 
on both sides in a suitable way. Thereby the mode splitting between the fundamental mode and the desired, 
antisymmetric vibration mode, in which the force sensor is operated, could be improved by a factor of 30. 
The realized sensor is characterized by a measured force sensitivity of 8.6 kHz/N in the measuring range 
up to 5 N.

A new type of pressure sensor based on a BOD structure (beam-on-diaphragm, patented) was designed with the aid
of FE calculations and mathematically optimized with respect to mode decoupling and sensitivity of the measured 
variables. In particular, the effect of the lever mechanism of the pressure-introducing membrane on the vibrating
beam was simulated, taking into account the complex beam clamping geometry caused by the manufacturing process. 
The described BOD pressure sensor has several geometry parameters for variable design of the pressure sensitivity, 
the pressure range and the overload behaviour.

It has been mathematically proven that by changing the membrane thickness, sensors can be manufactured for 
a pressure range of 0.5-12 bar with the same layout and the same overload safety. The experimentally realised 
pressure sensor has a pressure sensitivity of 4.47 kHz/bar in the pressure range from -0.8 to 1.0 bar, with 
a non-linearity of the characteristic curve of about +/- 3.8 %.


Inaugural dissertation

Inaugural dissertation for the acquisition of the doctorate of the 
Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences of the Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn.

https://www.mnf.uni-bonn.de/

https://www.uni-bonn.de/
