Synopsis of the doctoral thesis by Dipl.-Phys. Thomas Fabula
Hahn-Schickard-Institute for Micro- and Information Technology

Villingen-Schwenningen


"Dynamic Behavior of Micromechanical Systems - Finite Element Simulation for Design Support and its Verification by Measurement”

a.) Motivation:
When realizing micromechanical components and systems, the functional principles to be technologically realized and the 
process-technical boundary conditions (e.g. manufacturing tolerances, layer internal stresses) must be taken into account 
in the design phase, in addition to the component function.

Due to miniaturization and the high degree of integration, real micromechanical components show a strong 
interaction of various physical factors, which leads to a superimposition of unwanted disturbances. In addition, 
increasingly complex structural geometries and material compositions place increased demands on the micromechanical 
design, which requires the use of appropriate computer-aided design and simulation methods. At present, there are no 
consistent design tools that cover the diverse modeling requirements for the design of micromechanical systems. 
Previous investigations are limited to the modeling of individual micromechanical components and only allow rudimentary 
predictions of the overall system behavior, taking into account overlapping effects. Another problem is the not 
exactly known material properties of microtechnically manufactured thin-film systems.


b.) Objective of the work:
The physical behavior of micromechanical systems is to be predicted by applying and further developing suitable modeling methods.

The aim is to derive the design of microsystems with the help of analytical and numerical calculation methods in order 
to support the design process. Therefore, the development and formulation of analytical relationships and the development 
of simulation models for the numerical calculations using the finite element method.
To this end, the influence of the physical variables on the system behavior and the suitability of different excitation and 
detection principles are investigated in order to be able to carry out suitable modeling. Electrical and optical measurement
methods are used to characterize the dynamic microsystems and for the experimental verification of the calculation results. 
In the foreground are investigations on resonant micromechanical sensors, which can be used for the precision measurement of
various physical quantities (e.g. force, acceleration, pressure, temperature, mass flow and mass loading) due to their 
frequency-analog output signal.


c.) Main topics of the work:

1.) Analytical estimates:
The dynamic behavior of selected micromechanical basic geometries, such as simple beams and membranes, is to be described 
by analytical methods on the basis of single-crystal silicon and quartz material, taking into account micromechanical 
peculiarities.
The investigation of the influence of physical quantities on the vibrational behavior of the micromechanical resonators 
allows the evaluation the suitability for resonant sensor applications, for example. Non-linearities, which are caused 
by layer strain and large vibration amplitudes, for example, are to be taken into account. The analytical calculations 
enable a rough dimensioning of the micromechanical resonators and serve as initial values for the finite element simulation. 
comparison with the numerical calculations, the limits of the analytical description are to be demonstrated. 

2.) Numerical calculations:
With the help of the finite element method, micromechanical resonators are modeled and basic models are developed for 
selected basic geometries. The static and dynamic characteristics of the microstructures are calculated taking into account
various types of excitation (thermal, piezoelectric) and the frequency response behavior is determined taking into
account internal and external damping effects (material and fluid damping). In particular, the numerical investigations 
take into account the crystal orientation and temperature-dependent material properties, the influence of microtechnically 
specific boundary conditions and the assembly and connection technology (e.g. housing bracing). A further focus is on 
coupled calculations (thermally induced voltages, piezoelectricity) taking into account non-linear structural behavior.
The limits of the finite element calculation method and the achievable calculation accuracies are to be demonstrated 
by comparison with experimental 
measurement results.

3.) Measurement-based verification:
Electrical and optical measurement techniques are used to characterize micro-fabricated resonator structures. This is to 
verify the analytical and numerical calculation methods and to evaluate their suitability for the micromechanical design
process. In particular, both the basic properties of passive resonator structures (e.g. resonant frequencies, amplitude
response, temperature behavior) as well as the application-specific sensor properties (e.g. sensitivity, linearity of
characteristics) are measured. The investigation of damping effects plays an important role in the design of dynamic
microsystems and allows statements to be made about the vibrational quality of the overall system, 
whose individual contributions are extremely difficult to determine by measurement.


d.) Innovative aspects of the work:
The implementation of coupled finite element calculations, including thermally induced layer stresses and 
consideration of piezoelectric vibration excitation at micromechanical structures in thin-film construction (so-called 
multilayer structures) allows a targeted prediction of the microsystem behavior. Of particular interest for 
resonator optimization are statements, for example, about the most favorable layer thickness ratios and the shaping of the 
electrode structure. Suitable micromechanical test structures are being developed to verify and optimize the numerical 
calculation models.

Using the novel test structures, dynamic measurement methods can be used to quantitative statements about the process
quality, the mechanical, thermal and electrical material properties of micro-engineered layer systems can be determined.


01/1992
